- The Viking longships could
average 70 to 120 miles a day.
They could hit a place, raid
it, drag off whoever they
wanted, and get away before
you could get your army there.
That's just absolutely terrifying.
- What do you think it felt
like for Alcuin and the
monks to see the Viking
ships on the horizon?
- Honestly, I think it's the end of the world,
and I don't think they were wrong to think
that. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
says the night before
Lindisfarne, the monks saw sheets
of lightning in the sky in the
shape of dragons, and this obviously
meant to foreshadow the dragon
ships coming up. But if you
were brave, then you got
taken to the House of the Dead, which
was Valhalla. Every day you would
fight, and whatever wounds you got would be
magically healed that night, and then the
next morning, you'd get up and do it again,
so you're essentially practicing for
Ragnarok, the final battle.
You know, there's this poem
by Tennyson, Ulysses, my
favorite poem. I think it
captures the Viking spirit. The last
line of it is to strive, "To seek, to
find, and not to yield." I think
that's very much like the Viking,
you know, my purpose holds, to sail beyond the
baths of all the Western stars until I die.
We may die, but I'm gonna do
this, I'm not gonna yield.
- The following is a conversation
with Lars Brownworth, a
historian and author of many excellent
history books, including The
Sea Wolves: A History of the Vikings
and The Normans: From Raiders to Kings.
He's also the host of two
history podcast series. The
first called 12 Byzantine
Rulers: The History
of the Byzantine Empire is
one of the first, if not
the first ever, history
podcasts launched over 20
years ago in June, 2005. His second
series, Norman Centuries,
explores the remarkable
rise of the Normans from Viking
raiders to the rulers of
kingdoms stretching
from England to Sicily.
In this conversation, we focus
primarily on the Vikings, the
seafaring Norse warriors
and explorers who, over a
period of just 300 years,
reshaped the medieval
world and the trajectory of Western
civilization as we know it.
This is a Lex Fridman podcast. To support
it, please check out our sponsors
in the description where you
can also find links to contact
me, ask questions, give
feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends,
here's Lars Brownworth.
Your writing and podcasts take us from
the Vikings to the Normans to Crusades,
to the collapse of the East Roman Empire,
also known as the Byzantine Empire.
There's a thread, I think, that connects
the Vikings through all of it, so let's
start at the beginning. Let's
start with the Vikings.
So the age of the Vikings
was intense and violent,
as you write about, often
dated from 793 AD to 1066 AD.
It lasted less than three centuries. So
the start is often dated to June 8th,
793. What happened on June 8th, 793?
- In June of 793, a group of Vikings,
probably originating from Norway, arrived
at the Holy Island of Lindisfarne, which
was a monastic community, and they
essentially slaughtered everyone,
burned a couple of buildings and
grabbed everything that had any
value and left. And that was the
first Viking raid that
came in force. And I do
think Lindisfarne is a good beginning
date because the terror that
it brought really signified what was to
come for the next two to three centuries.
- So the word of it has spread.
Like there's a bunch of accounts,
like the monk Alcuin wrote about this
event in a letter to King Ethelred of
Northumbria, quote, "It is nearly 350
years that we and our fathers
have inhabited this most
lovely land, and never
before has such terror
appeared in Britain as we have
now suffered from a pagan
race, nor was it thought that such an
inroad from the sea could be made."
What made this race so psychologically
devastating to this monk and to the
many other monks on the island
and then to all of Britain?
- That's a great quote. Um,
Alcuin was not just a
regular scholar, he was
Charlemagne's favorite scholar
and he's largely responsible, as
much as one person can be, for the
Carolingian Renaissance that had done so
much to elevate the early medieval world.
In fact, the spaces we have,
the punctuation we have, spaces
between words are likely
a result of Alcuin's
work. He was an extremely literate
man, and you can hear the terror
creeping into that. Um, and part
of that has to do with monastic
communities, the Church and the- what they
thought a monastic community was. So
the Church was viewed as a sacred
place. Everyone in Europe,
everyone in quotes, is
nominally Christian, and the Church
is an area of safety. It's a
literal ark from the troubles of the
world that you can flee to. I believe
there are even rules in England,
for example, that if you had killed
someone, you could flee to a church
and the civil authorities were
not allowed to enter for up to 40
days. So you could have sanctuary
there. And to violate this
would've been the worst
possible offense you could have
given, which is why, you know, Thomas
Becket's murder is so, so
horrible in England. And the
monks had dedicated themselves
to a life of studying the Bible,
to copying scriptures to
prayer, to removing themselves
literally from the temptations of
the world. And so they would seek
monasteries that were remote, and
the most remote locations you could
find were islands in the North
Atlantic, because it's just so
difficult to get there.... So the
ocean was considered a place of
safety. Not sailing on the
ocean, but these islands were
literal havens of peace and
security and closeness to God.
And so the fact that the Vikings hit this
place of all places you could hit was
the worst, the most terrifying kind of
offense against medieval sensibilities.
- So there's a kind of line that you
understand you don't cross. Like, everybody
agrees.
- That's right.
- It's the kind of thing that there's a social
contract that most societies, most civilizations
sign. There's a line that we
don't cross. Let the scholars
do their scholarly work.
That's one line. The other
line is more kind of from a
military perspective, from a,
Mobility perspective, you
just assume the sea is not a
place from which a threat could come-
- Yeah, that's exactly right
- ... especially the north. So your
conception of the world is shattered
by, one, the brutality
that can come, two, that
the sea can bring a threat, and
three, that you don't give a
damn about any of the lines that
we as a society, as a Christian
society, have established.
- That's exactly right. I mean, even Alcuin,
I think he writes a little later on that
the dead were left as dung in the
streets. So he's describing dead monks as
literal dung in the streets. And, you
know, who would do this to men of God?
Inhuman monsters.
- So who were they, the Vikings, coming
from the north? How did they think
of the violence that they were doing?
- Now, that's a very good question because...
and it brings up a central problem,
of looking at the Vikings, which is
the story is almost always told from
somebody else's perspective largely from
the pens of those they're attacking.
So they're not gonna come across well. Um,
they're often portrayed as demonic and
inhuman. The Vikings themselves
though, as much as we can piece
together from archeology,
from the stories they wrote
later but that was another problem
there, the written alphabet, the runes.
It was mostly used for spells, naming
your sword, things like that, cursing
someone, but it wasn't really useful for
writing long poetry or literature. So the
only Norse literature we have comes
at the end of the age when they had
adopted the Latin alphabet.
So it's... you can almost never see
the Vikings in their own words as they
saw themselves. But we can piece certain
things together. Most importantly,
Viking was not their day job. They were
were mostly merchants and
farmers, mostly farmers who lived
in little bays called Viks in
Old Norse, which is probably
where we get the word Viking from. Um,
one other note about how hard it is to- to
tease apart what's happening here is the-
the English and the Frankish
and the Irish writers all
call them Danes, no matter where they came
from. They didn't stop to ask, "Now, excuse me,
are you from Norway, or are you
from..." So they're all called Danes or
Pagans, heathen, or Northmen. Um,
so this is not very helpful in
figuring out where they came from.
Um, the language was interchangeable. You
know, Old Norse was spoken in all three of
those Scandinavian countries. But
living in the north, so far
up near the Arctic Circle,
is... that's at the very limit of where technology
of the time could allow humans to survive.
And that kinda, that kinda harsh
climate bred, I think, very
hard people. Mercy was not
a quality they seemed to
favor, value. There's a very
famous story of a Swedish
Viking putting a sword in
the crib of his newborn
son, and saying, "May you have nothing in
this life but what you can gain with this."
I mean, I can't imagine doing that.
You know, to any of my children, you
know, putting a gun in the crib, or-
... you know, I'd be carted away.
But the... I think that kind of
underscores the kind of violent
life that was... you could
expect as a Viking. I mean, strength
was valued more than anything else.
- So the understanding
of the world is harsh,
and that strength is the
way you must face that
world. So when you have those people,
and especially the ones that self-select
to get on a boat, to face the
ocean with all the uncertainty,
that results in the kind of
brutality that we got to see.
- I think so. I mean, the way they would build their
ships, they were clinker built, so they were
overlaid, like planks overlaying.
So they were undecked as
well. And so they'd have tents. So can
you imagine crossing the Atlantic,
the northern Atlantic, you know,
with these huge waves splashing
over with an inch of oak
between you and the ocean?
I mean, the amount of bravery that
must have taken to undergo is
astounding. Plus they didn't have
a compass. They navigated by,
"Where's the sun? Where are the stars?
What... are there birds in the sky? Do
I see a different color of water? Do I see
leaves floating?" I mean, it's terrible.
If you're traveling 2,000
miles, that's not great.
So it's kind of an
intrepidness to them that
I think is part of the reason why they're
so fascinating to us in our sanitized,
more or less sanitized world. That
this incredible courage to do this,
and some horror at what they did on
the other end when they arrived.
But, you know, we'll talk a little bit
more about their religion, but they-
they do not view the Christian God
in particularly flattering terms.
I mean, to them, he's a weak
God who won't protect his adherence, and
they can just come in and plunder as
they... I mean, they'll... One Viking
famously says, "On land, I'm a Christian.
When I'm on the sea, I worship Thor."
It was very much the kind of
pragmatic take that the Vikings had.
- Yeah. There are gods, and they
have many, but Odin and Thor are
pretty hardcore gods. So everything, just
their whole philosophy on life
is pretty- pretty hardcore.
Probably some of the toughest
humans to have ever lived.
- I think so. Yeah. I mean, their
gods are horrifying. They're
polytheistic. There was no
universally accepted, Head god.
I think Marvel has also
led people astray in this.
- Well, we'll talk more about,
religion, but since you mentioned the boats, what-
what do we understand about the technology that they
were using? Can you just speak a little
bit more to this one inch of oak
idea? So, these were
these long ships that,
Were also able to travel
on rivers. So they're
not... Like, what- what is structurally,
do we know about the boats that
allowed them to be so flexible in
terms of where they can travel?
- Yeah. I mean, and this was the Vikings'
great secret, and I think it's
underappreciated. They built different
types of ships, obviously for different
purposes, but the thing that
blows my mind is that they
built these ships that could cross
an ocean, cross the Atlantic
Ocean, and at the same
time, when they had a
draft of less than two
feet, so they could sail up
rivers that were two feet deep. And
if they came to an, you know, a
block or something, 20 men could pick up
the ship and port it around. They were
incredibly portable and their
speed, the speed was the
most frightening thing about the Vikings.
- So the... These are the same kind of
ship that they sailed the ocean on.
- Yeah. I mean, it's insane.
- So they're pretty sufficiently robust
to handle the ocean and sufficiently
mobile to travel on rivers
and do so really fast, so-
... you mentioned speed. That seems to be,
from a military perspective, the
great advantage of the Vikings-
... because they can move much
faster than the land armies can.
So, and not just the element of
surprise, which they often had, but the
element of speed was the thing that
gave them such an extreme advantage
against the British armies.
- That was the big one. So,
an English army, if it had
access to a good Roman road that was well
maintained, which frankly there weren't tons
of them, but they could average
something like 10 to 15 miles per day-
... on a good day, if they didn't have a large
baggage train to slow them down. If you had a
cavalry unit that didn't have to
travel with the army, they could
average about 20 miles a day. The
Viking long ships could average
70 to 120 miles a day. So,
they're just moving in
super fast motion. They
could hit a place, raid it,
drag off whoever they wanted, and get away
before you could get your army there.
That's just absolutely terrifying.
- What do you think it felt like for Alcuin
and the monks to see the
Viking ships on the horizon?
Do you ever think about trying to put
yourself in the mind of those folks
and imagining...
In that time, you don't have a full
map of the world, right? And the
oceans are not mapped, and you have
a hazy conception of the world. And
so out of the darkness from the
ocean where you thought nothing can come,
comes this terrifying, this brutal force.
What do you think that felt like?
- Honestly, I think it's the end
of the world, and I don't think
that's... I don't think they were
wrong to think that. The Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle says the night
before Lindisfarne, the
monks saw sheets of lightning in the
sky in the shape of dragons. And this
obviously meant to, you know,
foreshadow the dragon ships coming up.
I can't imagine the horror. It would
shake my faith, I'm sure, to have these-
these giant men jumping out of their ships
with swords raised. And you're... What
do you have? Your cross?
- Were the Vikings aware of the
fear that they had caused?
So, did they use fear as a kind
of weapon, or was this just a
side consequence of their actions,
or did they understand and
use it? Like the Mongols, Genghis Khan,
the Mongols used the fear and the
terror on purpose-
... to increase the chance that they
wouldn't have to avoid fights, basically.
- Yeah, yeah. The Vikings absolutely
used terror. It was a main
weapon in their arsenal. They would attack
specifically on high holy
days like Easter, Christmas,
because they knew there'd be higher value
targets there with richer clothing, richer
offerings. There'd be a lot of money
available. So they were rather
sophisticated, which I think is
something also that they don't get much
credit for. It's like they were
just dumb brutes attacking and just
destroying. But they were... It was
very sophisticated. They would show up.
That's what I mean when I say Viking
wasn't their day jobs. They would be
traders in say an English
port, kind of looking
around. They'd get everyone's schedule,
then they would sail away and
come back as Vikings, and they knew exactly
where to go. They knew where all the
money was held. They knew where all the,
you know, the churches were, when to
attack. They knew the entire Christian
calendar. They knew when someone's
baptism was, when someone's confirmation.
I mean, they were aware of all of this.
And they would... They would
definitely attack to increase terror.
- One of the signs of the intelligence
of the Vikings is that the
Viking Age is so short.
So what happens is these explorers and
these Rough men who do the raids, they
very quickly are good at
conquering and then start state
building, or conquering and
then establishing trade
routes and stop being the
quote, unquote, "Vikings." So
basically, they just... They
conquer, and then they start doing
the usual instit- build the
institutions, start a state,
and now they're normal kind of nation,
civilization kind of thing.
So this kind of force that is
the conquering, raid, violent,
intense explorers, it's like a
short-lasting thing, a couple
of generations at most.
- Yeah, that's right. I mean, the
Vikings were ultimately a pragmatic
people who, if it worked,
they would keep it,
which is frustrating because they
disappear so quickly because of that.
- With very little trace in the records-
- With very little trace. That's right.
- ... with very little writing.
- That's right.
- No time for writing it down.
- No. Yes. Not doing that.
- Yeah. Why were monasteries such
good targets for these early raids?
- This is where I imagine myself as a
Viking and one of my ancestors perhaps.
And sailing in... I mean, they must
have thought they had won the lottery.
You got this rich, these rich
buildings, rich gold everywhere.
Decorated books, jewels,
all guarded by old men who
don't know how to fight. You just take it.
- I mean, we should make clear that the
monasteries had... They were used as almost like
storage for gold.
- Yeah. And this goes all the way back to,
you know, the Roman Empire where, you know,
think of, for example, the Emperor Augustus.
When he was writing his will, he put it in
the Temple of the Vestal Virgins
as well as Mark Antony and
Cleopatra. They'd all done
that because there's this
additional protection of religion-
... and this taboo against violating
that. And the same thing happened
when Europe was Christianized.
Monasteries were... I mean, rich people,
their faith had to be an active
faith. They couldn't just say their
prayers and go to church on Sunday. They
would have to do something to publicly
show that they were, you know, worthy
of forgiveness or, or whatever.
And so they would donate
huge sums to the church. I
think, you know, by the time of the French
Revolution, which is obviously way in the future,
the Church is the largest single landowner
in France. I mean, the monasteries
where... These, these monasteries filled
with monks who had taken vows of poverty
were some of the richest places in Europe.
It's kind of a strange dichotomy here.
- And then we should also say that the
Vikings, many of them pragmatic people, so a
lot of them would eventually then
convert to Christianity, so you get-
- That's right
- ... you integrate
yourself into the system.
- That's right.
- In some sense, religion
creates this backbone of a society that
stabilizes it, and then you create a
bunch of rules about behavior, how you're
supposed to behave. One of the rules
is you don't mess with
the church buildings and-
- That's right
- ... the religious-
... institutions and therefore they
become great storage places for gold.
- That's right.
- And then the Vikings here
just test the system.
Uh, I mean, it's the fortune
of geography for them
and the fortune of their way of life,
To be able to raid, to become extremely
rich and therefore this... It
both spreads the terror across England,
and the message across
Scandinavia that there's a lot
of riches to be had. And so the raids,
that's why there's an explosion of raids.
- That's right. And I think it's not a
coincidence that it happens when it
does. I mean, you have both... So there's two
main theories about why the Viking Age starts.
The first, Will Durant puts it, I think,
the best. He says, "The fertility of the
Viking women outstripped the
fertility of the Viking land." It's
basically overpopulation.
Um, and then they're searching
for food. And then the second
is there's this technological breakthrough
with the keel and maybe pressure
put on Charlemagne's consolidation
and a little worries like that.
I don't see why both
can't be true but I do,
I do also think Europe... Like, Charlemagne
puts together this vast empire that,
you know, fairly approximates the
Western Roman Empire. If you squint-
... it looks like the Western Roman
Empire. He's calling himself,
The new Roman emperor.
This will eventually
mutate into the Holy Roman
Empire. But it's very
much this idea that it's back.
The Roman Empire is back.
He's crowned on Christmas Day in
the year 800, and the empire is
back. Unfortunately, it was sprawling. It
hadn't been thought through. There was...
The communication was terrible.
You just couldn't do it. And so it
was wealthy and weak, and that
kind of attracts predators.
By the time the Vikings crash into it,
you also have the added bonus for them of
really feckless rulers.
- And we should say, going to Perplexity
here, that Charlemagne, also known as
Charles the Great, is the
Frankish king who became
emperor in 800 and ruled much
of the Western and Central
Europe in the late eighth and
early ninth centuries. And,
There's a theory that the
Viking Age was also a
reaction to the South expanding
north, as you're talking about.
You tell the story of Charlemagne
weeping because he foresaw the
evil his descendants would suffer. Did the
Franks accidentally wake the sleeping
giant by crushing the Saxons and removing
the buffer zone between
them and the Vikings?
- I'm sure that had something to do
with it. But yeah, as power was
consolidated throughout specifically
Central Europe it did put a little
pressure on the areas of Denmark. And
those are the areas that first kind of
erupt down toward,
um... Norway and Denmark contribute
most of the early Vikings that
hit the Franks. And the Frankish Empire
is the most wealthy state in
Europe. It's poured money
into religious houses for the reasons you
outlined. And all sitting there,
easy pickings for people who've just
developed the keel.
- And so the word of the
raids sent terror through,
through England and through Europe.
How much of the raids were
reconnaissance, and how
much was it just raids, and how much
was it preparing for greater scale?
- That's a good... That's a really
good question. I think a lot
of the early raids are probing
raids, to see what's there.
Um, definitely when Ragnar Lothbrok,
for example, sacks Paris in 845,
that definitely results in waves of
Viking attacks throughout the 860s,
trying to copy that. And he
actually is the template which
everyone wants to follow. And
so that provokes large-scale
invasions. And they hit
England. They kind of
switch off. When France is pretty much exhausted,
they switch over to England, and then when
England is pretty much conquered,
they switch back to France.
So I think a lot of these are just probing
raids at first, but they're proof of
concept and then they come in
force. For example, there was one
king in England, his name was
Ethelred the Unready, which is a
pretty funny... Pun on his
name. But he paid, in one year,
7.5 million silver pennies to the
Vikings to get them to go away, which
is a bit like someone's mugging you, so you
pay them more money so they'll go away.
It's-
- That's not gonna work, is it?
- It's not gonna work, but it
will bring more muggers. Um, so
he paid the equivalent of 50 adult
elephants, 48,000 pounds of silver,
to get the muggers to go away. And
it's unsurprising that throughout the
course of his reign,
he paid something like
20 tons of gold and silver, which
he had to tax his people for.
- Um, yeah, the Vikings are not the kind of
people that would make go away, right?
- Nope. That's not gonna happen.
- Yeah, they would just come back in force.
- Yeah, they trust silver
to do the work of swords.
- Uh, you mentioned Ragnar Lothbrok. Who was
Ragnar Lothbrok? Did he actually exist?
Some people believe he's a composite
from several real ninth century
Viking leaders, versus an
actual singular human.
- Yeah, I'm a romantic. I would
like to believe he existed. Um, I
think probably he's a compilation of a lot
of different... There
probably is a seed of
truth there. There probably
was someone named Ragnar.
The last name's a little
suspicious. Lothbrok means hairy
breeches. He supposedly had magic pants
that would prevent him from being poisoned
by dragons or snakes. That's maybe a clue.
We're dealing with myth here. But he
is really the template for Vikings. You
want to figure out, like, what the Vikings
wanted, who's their success story, it's
Ragnar Lothbrok. He's born Norway,
Denmark, countries argue over that. Maybe
Sweden. Some sagas say he's in Uppsala.
Anyway, he is, you know,
penniless, and when he is
in his late teens or early 20s, he
decides to invade, sail up the Seine. Uh,
there is a well-known city on
the Seine and he raids it.
Supposedly, he takes the hinge of
one of the gates from Paris to
prove that he's been there. The- the
Frankish king, I love the
Frankish kings because they-
their citizens give them names
based on how much they hate them.
So you have- you have Charles the Great,
right? Charles the Great, Charlemagne.
He's followed by Louis the Pious.
That's probably the best one.
And Louis the Pious is
followed by Charles the Fat-
... who's followed by Charles the Bald-
... who's followed by Charles
the Simple or Stupid.
- Nice. So you can trust the names-
- You can trust—
- to give you the TLDR of how
good of a ruler they were.
- Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
- So Charles the Great, widely
acknowledged as sort of one of
the great leaders of the Frankish
Empire- ... aka Charlemagne.
Uh, so what else do we know
about him? So, there's
going to Perplexity, "Ragnar's portrayed
as a Scandinavian warlord, often
called a Danish or Swedish
king," like you mentioned.
Uh, "Active in the ninth century during
the height of the Viking raids."
And then descriptions of
the raids and the exploits.
"Medieval traditions link Ragnar to
famous raids on the Frankish realms,
especially the attack on
Paris in 845, where he
reputedly sails up the Seine and extorts
a huge ransom from King Charles the
Bald." He's also associated
with repeated attacks on
Anglo-Saxon England, embodying
the archetypal Viking
chieftain, charismatic, brutal, and focused
on wealth, fame, and honor in battle.
So that, those are the ideals of
the Vikings. Charisma, brutality-
... and focusing on wealth, fame, and
honor, especially honor in battle.
- Then also,
what does he do with it, right? What does he
do with it? So, he gets about 7,000 pounds of
silver from Charles the Bald, which destroys,
essentially destroys Charles the Bald's
kingship. But he goes back home to
Denmark, and the Danish king
doesn't want him around,
because he's too powerful,
he's too rich. He's a ring
giver. You know, think Beowulf
here, right? He's got this
large personal army which wants to
join him for ad- he can do, you
know, they'll follow him, and he
is a threat, and so he kind of is
encouraged to go elsewhere. He ends
up raiding England for something like
15 years, and then there's a,
probably the most famous bit of the
story is he's shipwrecked, and King
Aella of Northumberland
captures him and decides to
kill him by throwing him
into a pit with vipers.
They throw him in this and the snakes are biting
him, but he's got his hairy breeches on, so
it's not working. So, he's
singing a hymn to Odin
and he gets pulled out and
he's asked why he's not dying
and he explains, rather foolishly, that he
has these hairy breeches. So, they take the
pants off and throw him back,
and his last words are,
um, "When the boar bleats, the
piglets come."... by which
he means, "My s- I have sons,"
he had 12 of them, "and they
will avenge me." And they
do, they lead the the Great
Heathen Army to invade
and eventually conquer
England. Aella, fun fact,
not so fun for him,
is the, supposedly was captured
by the son of Ragnar, his
name is Ivar the Boneless, which is
somewhat terrifying of a name. And he is,
he's the first person that a
blood eagle was performed on.
- What's the blood eagle?
- It's when they remove the lungs, they,
while you're still alive, they cut you
open and remove the lungs and
put the lungs on your back.
And then when you try to breathe, they
flutter like wings, so it's called, like
an eagle. It's called the blood eagle.
- That is horrible.
- It's disgusting, yes. And this is
what Aella, you know, deserves,
according to, you know,
Bjorn Ironside and Ivar the
Boneless, the sons of Ragnar.
Like, this is what they get.
- Offense.
- This is the piglets coming-
... to their own boar, you know?
One last thing about Ragnar,
is his wife is also an
important part. He had
something like 12 sons, the
accounts differ, and probably
three marriages. But his most
famous wife was named Aslaug,
and she fell in love with him. He was
on a ship, he was passing through, so-
... kind of a glamorous sea king,
right? With his, he's living the
dream. And she sees him and she wants
to be married to him, and he says no.
He says, 'cause he wants a clever
wife, and so he says, "If you can
accomplish these three things, you can
marry me. So tomorrow, I'll be here
tonight, and then tomorrow, I want
you to come to my ship. I want you
to have no clothes on-
... but not be naked. I want you
to have not eaten a meal, but
not have fasted. And I want you to come
without a companion, but not alone."
And so she shows up
with a dog. She doesn't have a companion,
but she's not alone. She's taken a
bite out of an onion, so she's eaten. She
hasn't fasted, but she hasn't had a meal.
And then she has very long hair, and
so she's using the hair to cover
herself. So she has no clothes-
- Oh, she shows up naked, but she's-
- ... but clothed.
- Right. Wow.
- Yeah, so in this, so this is kind of the
cleverness that would be expected of a,
of a Viking woman. So they're well
matched, they're like the ideal couple.
And then they have 12 kids, 12
sons. Not just 12 kids, 12 sons.
- And many of them end up...
- Many of them end up almost
as famous as their father.
- Ivar the Boneless. Uh, Bjorn
Ironside, and many others. These sons
later appear as leaders of major
Viking forces in England, particularly
the so-called Great Heathen
Army- ... that invades in 865.
- And they are historical. They are,
I mean, there's no, these were the
names of Vikings who attacked
and conquered England.
They end up attacking Islamic
Spain. They go all over Europe.
- Well, for them, it sounds like glory
in battle is really important.
- That's right, yeah.
- And so it's not even- It's just
part of the culture, it's part-
- That's right
- ... the honor culture.
- Men die, but names live forever.
- Uh, as a small aside, since Ragnar
is the star of the Vikings TV
series, I don't know if you've
gotten a chance to watch any of it.
Is there any accuracy to it?
- I think it's well done. My
one quibble, Ragnar's brother
is Rollo in the show, right?
They weren't brothers. In fact, by some
accounts, they were born 80 years apart.
But as a storytelling
device, I applaud that.
- Yeah, they basically take all the main
Vikings and put them all together.
Just so it's a-
- I mean, I get it. I get it, it's confusing.
Honestly, in writing a book about it, the
hardest part was coming up with an
organizational scheme. Like, what's the
overarching thing that
links them together?
- Well, there's certainly an
overarching thing, but we don't have
information about it. This is, the problem
is we get to see just slivers of the
information-
- That's right, that's right
- ... from the raids. There might be
just this rich history that we know
nothing about. Like where did
this warrior culture come from?
Like, what was the evolution of these ideas
of honor and battle? I mean, maybe it's
being overly romantic, but you can imagine
the ideals of battle from the Roman
Empire, from the Roman Republic
and the early imperial period
coming up north to Scandinavia. And we
just know very little traces about that.
- Yeah. Even the name Scandinavia
is from a Roman author.
I mean, they thought it was an island. They
thought Scandinavia was an island with one tribe,
the Scandia tribe, but
you know, close enough.
- And uh, who was the, what was
in this Great Heathen Army
that invaded England in 865?
What can we say about that?
- Well, there's this famous scene in the
Viking siege of Paris in 845, which
is really the Europeans'
introduction, or Europe as a whole,
to a Viking army, not just a
raid and then what it could
do. And the king, the emperor,
Charles, said, "You know, let's find
out what they want and how much do
I have to pay to get them to leave?"
And so his ambassador went to a
Viking and said, "Who is your king?"
And the Viking looked at him, he didn't
understand, and he said, "We have no king.
We are all kings." So they're very like
decentralized, tough. They only valued
leaders who could prove that they had,
they had won. You know,
could give out the rings.
- So flat organization, very meritocratic.
- Yes.
- If you're good at what you do,
you demonstrate that skill in
battle. That means you get to
have maybe a leadership position.
- That's right.
- And the moment you're no longer effective,
you don't get to have this leadership
position. We're all kings.
That's gangster. Throughout
history, the Mongols, Genghis Khan
was famous for this meritocracy.
- That's right. Yeah.
- That's one of the components of an
extremely effective military force is if
meritocracy is prized.
Same is true for who
gets to rule. How do you determine
the succession? If you're
just giving it to your oldest
son, that's gonna be a problem.
- Yeah. Yeah, that... I could not agree
more. There are some problems with,
with meritocracy in civil war because it
tends to... The only way you can find out,
like Alexander the Great, right? Who does
your empire belong to? To the strongest.
That kind of guarantees the civil war. At
least with giving it to your older son,
you know who's gonna be... There's
an element of stability there
although you may end up with a Caligula.
More likely than not, you're gonna end up
with a Caligula, I would say, human nature
being what it is.
- It's— It's... Yeah, yeah, it always converges
to the asshole, and the asshole holds
power, a crazy asshole. Uh, so
yeah, Great Heathen Army, 865.
- So the Great Heathen Army, they were war
bands that... Each followed this guy and
this guy.
"And I'm gonna sit you down in this room. I'm
gonna tell you my plan. You're gonna listen
or you're gonna push back. I'm gonna push back,
and we'll just have this kind of creative
discussion and come up with
a plan we all agree on."
- So it used to be relatively small
Viking groups that were doing raids.
And then the Great Heathen Army is
this large coalition of Viking groups-
- That's right
- ... without a real leader that
was able to somehow stabilize enough
to have something like governance.
Basically, there seems to be a
very rapid evolution of a Viking
in every part of the world they
touch. You go explore, Raid, conquer,
establish state- ... And trade routes,
and always maintaining a grand ambition,
but no longer doing the
violence, and always
being sufficiently programmatic and
flexible where you can accept a
conversion to Christianity,
for example, if it's useful-
- That's right
- ... and then they accept the culture, accept
the language. So that's why they integrate and
the thing that we think of as Viking dis-
kind of dissipates and disappears pretty
quickly.
- Yeah, and I think the best example
of this is France, right? So the
Vikings, which is we'll talk
about this more probably with
Rollo, but, you know, the Vikings
settle in France, in the North
Man's Duchy, which is shortened
to Normandy. And they, within
a generation... I mean, Rollo, whose
real name is Hrolf, he names his son
William. That's not a Viking
name. And within a generation,
the language is gone. The
Viking names are gone. The
worship of Odin is, as
far as we can tell, gone.
And the Normans are building
churches and marrying into the local
aristocracy in there. Their...
Essentially, their Viking-ness is gone
except for one thing, their,
like, incredible vitality,
which the Normans essentially conquer
kingdoms at both ends of Europe,
Sicily and England, and found
two of the foremost powerful
states in medieval Europe.
- Yeah, so the ambition is there.
- Is there.
- The vitality is there, but it's-
- The methods have changed.
- Yeah, and they change rapidly,
which is fascinating.
So you have a book. You
have a podcast series on,
The Normans, so let's talk
about Rollo. Who was Rollo?
The famous Viking war leader
who became the first ruler
of Normandy, Northern France.
- Well, first I should say, as someone
of Norwegian descent, I'm gonna fall
down on the Norwegian side of
the argument here because-
... Norway and Denmark almost came to blows
over which was the birthplace of Rollo.
But the consensus seems to be Norway-
Not just biased. Um, so he was...
The only thing we... The only glimpse
we get of Rollo as a young man is
he was very tall, so he's
called Hrolf the Walker, Hrolf
Ganger because he was so tall he couldn't
ride the little Viking ponies. So
he had to walk everywhere. But... Kinda
poor probably raised on stories of
Ragnar and the other Viking
lords, and he goes. He
may have participated in some of the
earlier, like the 860 raids that
the Vikings did on Paris or
the Seine, you know, and
then he eventually ends up plundering
the, what will become the Norman
coast. And in the, in the year 911,
he makes a treaty, the Treaty
of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte with
the Frankish King, Charles the
Simple, which is not stupid. It's,
it's more like straightforward. There's
no guile in how he talks. Uh, and
Charles makes a really interesting deal
with Rollo, which is, um, "Why don't you
settle here, integrate
into the local aristocracy
and defend the French coast
against the Vikings?"
Which I don't know. It's like
putting a burglar in charge of
your security or some- I
don't know, but it works.
It works. And Rollo, by the time he
makes that deal, he's probably in his
mid-fifties to mid-sixties. It's unclear
when he was born, but the point is
he's lived the Viking life. He's,
he's got something like 20 or 30, if
you add up all the sagas they say
that he... they gave him this many coins
or whatever. He has probably 20 or
30 tons of silver that he has acquired and
then probably given out to whatever. So-
- So yeah, so he's done the full-
- He's done the thing. Yeah
- ... and then the conquering and then-
- And then the king says, "Can you settle
here?" "Can I give you legitimacy?"
- So he does the diplomacy of a treaty.
... then he does the good
statecraft and state building and
then becomes, I mean, European. In one
life, he goes through the full journey.
- It's... Yeah.
- And then his son, William Longsword-
... succeeded him and, uh ...
- Gets assassinated, but he does
enlarge Normandy. So basically, every
ruler after Rollo enlarges
Normandy until it-
it essentially becomes more
powerful than the king—
... By far. There's a
wonderful scene when Rollo,
Signs the treaty. He becomes a liege lord
of the French king, and there's this
great scene 'cause Rollo has to bend
down and kiss the foot of the king.
So Rollo's probably, you know, he's
a Norwegian Viking. He's probably,
I don't know, six foot. Charles, this
little Frank, he's probably five ten. So
he's like Rollo's towering over him,
and there's a large- both armies are
watching. There's a bunch of people who have
come in from the countryside. They've heard
something's going on, and this important part of
this feudal ceremony, you have to kiss
your lord's foot to- to, you know,
be in a subservient role. And Rollo says, "I'm
not gonna do that." So he turns to one of
his guards and says, "You kiss the foot,"
and the guard's probably taller than he is.
So he bends down and he picks
the king's foot up to his mouth-
- That's the way to do it
- ... which Charles goes
falling on the back. I mean-
... I can't think of a better example
of the relationship between the Norman
dukes and the French kings. I
mean, it's perfect. It's perfect.
- Oh God, I love the Vikings.
So as you've covered, and maybe you
could speak to that a bit more,
for a long time to come, Normans
have influence on Europe and beyond.
- Yeah, it's hard to overstate Normandy's
impact on Europe in the Middle Ages.
Of course, they will go on
to conquer England as well.
But Rollo, when he signs the treaty, it's
an ambiguous treaty. He's given a title
which is rather ambiguous. He's
not a duke, and it's not clear.
He's not an earl. He's not a duke.
He's just subservient to the king.
Which means Normandy is
not a duchy. It's not a
principality. It's kind of this
ambiguous, no one really knows what it
is. And so Rollo, being a good
Viking, and his descendants
being good Vikings, despite becoming
French, they just call themselves Duke.
And they essentially seize
whatever power they want. There's
one Norman duke, I think he's the
grandson of Rollo. He's kidnapped by
the French king when he's 14. He escapes
the captivity and kidnaps the king.
As a 14-year-old, I mean, it's just-
these are- these guys are crazy.
- How far geographically and in time
does the influence of the Normans
and Normandy go? So what should we
understand about the impact of Normans-
... in history?
- I'm a romantic, so I, when
I read history, I usually
end up rooting for the losers. Um,
I want Harold Godwinson to beat No-
William the Conqueror. You know, I
want Hector to beat Achilles. Never
works, no matter how many
times I read it. But
I was always interested in the Normans
because of the Norman conquest of England.
And my I have a twin brother, and he asked
me, we were taking a walk, and he asked me,
"How did Europe..." Uh, 'cause we, I
was reading about the Dark Ages at the
time, the the early Middle Ages. "And how
did Europe, this kind of backwards place,
become the dominant-"
"... force in the world?"
And I started thinking about that,
and my answer really is the Normans.
The Normans, that's the
great change between
Europe as a backwards, inward-looking
place, and Europe as a kind of
confident, outward-looking place.
And that change happens under-
under the Normans. I mean, the Normans,
it's not a coincidence that they-
they lead the charge in the First Crusade.
They create the state of England.
If you look at England before the
Vikings arrive, there are seven,
it's the Heptarchy, there are seven
kingdoms in England, and the
Vikings destroyed all but one. Only
Wessex is preserved, and they've
conquered about half of Wessex.
And there's a young king.
What's he gonna do?
But that king is Alfred the Great, and
he conquers the rest. And then his
grandson, Athelstan, is the first man
called King of England, king of all Angles.
And then they do the same thing
almost wherever they go. They
help create modern
France by ripping apart,
uh, Charlemagne's empire,
which was unwieldy.
It looked good on paper, but it was
unwieldy. It was replaced by this leaner,
meaner, compact thing. They figure
out how to deal with the Vikings by
essentially building fortified bridges,
changes to their army, and so forth.
The Vikings, I—I like to call it
creative destruction. It—they, by
destroying the things they destroyed,
they cleared the ground for something
stronger to grow.
- Uh, that's brilliant. The creative
destruction engine that created Europe
was the Normans and the Vikings.
And then you also, you have another
book that talks about the Byzantine
Empire, so you have the creative
destruction that resulted in Europe,
that Europe led to this Western, quote-unquote,
civilization that we think of now.
And the thing that protected
Europe for centuries
was the existence of the Byzantine
Empire, the East Roman Empire,
because of all the threats-
- That's right.
- ... That came towards Europe. This strong,
stable empire that is the Byzantine Empire
protected the forces from
everything that came from the east.
- Yeah, that's right.
- They were a buffer.
- They were a buffer, giving Europe this kind
of vital time to develop the way it needed
to develop.
- So it's—it's interesting to think that
the world as we see now was a result—
... of a sequence of quite
lucky geographical and
leadership decisions in history.
I mean, it really does pivot on
a few points of geography and a few
special leaders- ... that conquer.
- Yeah. Had Constantine chosen
his side a little less wisely,
the world's going to be very different.
- Yeah, so Constantine is the guy
who moved the capital of the
empire from Rome to Constantinople, thereby
giving a lot more focus to the east.
Thereby protecting Europe from
the gigantic threats that—
- That's right.
- ... loomed in the east.
- That's right. And the Islamic invasions
of the seventh century, they couldn't
get past that choke point of Constantinople.
So they had to take the long way
across Africa. You know, and
by the time they get to Spain,
And conquer Spain and into,
that's the Battle of Tours,
you know, Charles Martel is able
to stop them, and they're, they're
massively overextended. You know, I think
it's a very different story if they can come
in through the Black Sea.
- And all the times the East Roman Empire
almost died from all the invasions,
all of those invaders would have just
conquered the entirety of Europe.
- Yeah, I mean, I don't think they
would've met much resistance.
- Yeah. So rewinding back,
what was the religion, the
religious beliefs, the gods
that the Vikings believed that
we've mentioned a little bit of? Thor and
Odin, how did they see this, this world
and the universe?
- It's, so the Viking gods are... I mean,
they've been sanitized, but they're quite
terrifying. But their
basic conception of the
universe is an eternal
struggle between chaos and
order, which chaos will
eventually win. So I think the
best view of cosmology is
of concentric circles, with
Utgard is the outer realm and that's where
the chaos is. And those are the, that's
where the frost giants are,
all the monsters that seek to
destroy. The gods represent
order and stability, and the
monsters represent chaos, and it's an
eternal war between the two of them.
Um, so there are different categories
of gods depending on which circle you
come from. The gods don't all
like each other. They're not...
Sometimes they engage in wars. Some of the
most famous gods, the Norse
gods, you know, Loki or Freya,
come from outside the Aesir, the main
gods. So it was kind of a fluid thing.
- It's more a way to understand the world.
- I think so, yeah. The thunder is
Thor fighting the ice giants,
and that's what that is.
- Uh, going to Perplexity. Vikings
followed the polytheistic,
ritual-heavy religion centered on a
pantheon of gods and spirits with no
single holy book or unified church,
and practices varied a lot by
region and family. And so the major
gods were Odin and Thor and Freya.
Odin was, his domain was
war, kingship, wisdom,
death. Thor was protection, thunder,
fertility. Freya was love, magic,
battle dead. Um,
typical worshipers for Odin were
chieftains and elite warriors and poets.
Typical worshipers for Thor were
farmers and "ordinary people,"
and typical worshipers of
Freya were women, magic
practitioners, and lovers.
- Yeah, yeah. I mean, I've heard it... I think
you can break it down saying like, Odin
was the elite. He's kind of
more aristocratic, right?
- Yes.
- He's the god of poetry, you need to read, et
cetera. Only the elite would know how to do
that. A farmer wouldn't really care about
that. Wherein Thor is a more earthy god.
You know, you want the waves to be
less, you know, pray to Thor. Um,
I find Odin, I think, most
disturbing. He's the god of
madness and the god of poetry,
which, I guess those are related.
- Yeah.
- Um, but in battle, I mean, the berserkers,
probably the most famous type of Viking
warriors, were considered to be Odin's
chosen warriors. They would show
no pain, and they'd just run at
the enemy and attack with their
nails and their teeth.
Even if they could have their arms
hacked off, they would still keep going.
Like they would just... And they would
attack other Vikings. They were berserk.
That's where we get the word from.
- Uh, what do we understand
the mindset leads to that?
I mean, it wasn't religious in
nature. There's not this kinda
ideology. It's just the way
of life and then the prized
honor and intensity in battle.
- Yeah. I mean, one of Odin's names
is the raven feeder. I mean, you
were, by creating corpses,
which ravens feed on, you are,
you're doing the work of
Odin. And, you know, the,
the Viking view of the afterlife was
unique. There weren't really punishments,
not really, for doing bad things.
Unless you did something really bad.
Then you ended up as basically an
evil spirit, haunting your grave.
But if you were brave, then you got
taken to the house of the dead, which is
Valhalla to... And you were
resurrected. Every day
you would fight, and whatever wounds you
got would be magically healed that night.
And then the next morning you'd get up and do
it again. So you're essentially practicing for
Ragnarok- ...the final battle,
which you would lose. So I'm not sure.
It seems, it's rather pessimistic.
- The battle's what... I mean,
it sounds like losing is not a
thing. The battle itself
is what matters, so
Valhalla...It's a place where
you fight a battle every day.
- Every day.
- Unlimited food, there's
like a boar or whatever.
- Yeah. Yeah, that's right.
- There's unlimited wine.
- Yep.
- And you can die as much as you want-
- As much as you want, yeah
- ...and you'll be born again. And
this is the idea of the highest...
This, I guess, if there's such a
thing as heaven in this kind of
construction of the
universe, this is heaven.
- This is heaven, yeah.
- This is the highest form. This is the
highest place you can go to is Valhalla.
Is fight every day, eat as much as
you want, drink as much as you want,
die and are reborn the next day.
And this is forever, preparing yourself
for the final battle of Ragnarok.
- Ragnarok.
- So this is where, this is the end of
the world, this is the cataclysm.
- Mm-hmm. That's right.
Odin's gonna die, Thor will die. He'll
get killed by one of Loki's children, the
Midgard Serpent. Odin will
be devoured by a wolf.
The sun and moon, which
are being chased by
monsters, by giants, will be caught
and swallowed by the giants,
plunging the world into eternal darkness.
Essentially all the gods will die
and darkness and chaos will then
ensue. And then at the very
end the... This is mostly from a
guy named Snorri Sturluson who was
living right at the end of the Viking Age
and writing this. And he was, I believe, a
Christian. So there's... I
think we're fusing things here.
So then there would be a new Earth
and a new heaven and a new god,
who's all powerful.
- Yeah, if you think of religion
as a kind of technology,
a social technology that stabilizes or helps
guide the evolution of a society, it's
interesting to see what the Vikings
came up with. And do you ever think
from a history, the grand view of history,
how effective these different
technologies of religion have been?
- Yeah, I mean, I think that's certainly...
I'm thinking of the Viking
rituals. Hospitality is
very important in a northern climate
where, you know, food is scarce, winters
are long and harsh. And if you
don't share your hearth with,
you know, someone knocking on your door, then
someone else might not share it with you
and you could be facing death. So in this
case hospitality becomes a core belief
and— ... you know, the idea was
that Odin would travel incognito,
knocking on people's doors,
and he would remember
if you let him in or not. And if you were
hospitable, he would bless you, and if you were
inhospitable, he would murder you. And—
... you know, I think these rituals
are obviously intended for,
"How do we survive this winter?"
- Yeah, how do we effectively spread the
message that hospitality is pretty?
Good thing and it's
characteristic of religion.
If you do a good thing, you'll be
rewarded. If you do a bad thing, you'll
be punished. And then different
religions play the different ways of
communicating that.
- Yeah. I mean, I think also
religion gives you, it gives you a
world view, right? It gives you a morality
and these are core parts of society.
- And the beautiful thing about religion
is it interplays with human
nature and it guides humans.
But then of course,
human nature and humans
project themselves onto the religion,
sometimes they use their religion. It's
to accomplish goals in a pragmatic sense, in
a political sense, in a geopolitical sense,
in a military sense, in a social
sense. And so there's that dance of
how religion invigorates
and guides the peoples,
and then how the peoples use the religion
to guide the direction of the world.
And that's certainly the history of
Christianity has a big role to play in
the history of Europe, in the
history of the Byzantine Empire,
And that part of the world. And it
was an incredibly effective religion,
Once Constantine converted.
It spread extremely quickly, relatively
speaking, across a couple of
centuries. Just to linger
on the Viking views of the
world and the afterlife. So we
mentioned Valhalla. There's the Norns,
which are the three spirits that
represent the past, the present and the
necessity. They spin the fates of all
men and gods at the Roots of Yggdrasil.
- Yeah. Yggdrasil.
- Yggdrasil. So there's a notion
of like determinism and fate
to the Viking life. And there's
Valhalla, there's Hel, Niflheim.
This was the destination for
the vast majority of people.
So if you don't make it to
Valhalla, this is where you go.
- That's where you go.
- Unless you're a real bad person, then there's
some punishment for the truly wicked.
- And we should point out that Hel, spelled
with one L was a daughter of Loki-
... And was not the same as the...
- Hel with the two L's.
- Hel with the two L's. Very different.
- It's more like purgatory
type of situation.
- Yeah, so it's the house of the, it's like the
house of the dead, the house of the underworld.
- A colorless twilight, not necessarily
a place of punishment but
simply the inevitable end for most, unless
you end up in Valhalla, which means
you're a great warrior dying in battle.
- It reminds me of the Greek view of the afterlife, right?
Where you essentially get amnesia and forget who you
are unless someone makes a sacrifice
and says your name, and only
then you'll remember it. So
your destiny is ultimately to
just become gray and fade
away. So you might as well-
you might as well be brave. You
might as well run at that spear.
- So that was the engine of their-
the warrior culture that
was core to their society.
- I think probably.
- I have to ask about Vikings as explorers.
They were...... truly one of the greatest
explorers in history. What can you say to,
what is it in their spirit that motivated
them? I mean, they sailed, they
reached North America 500 years
before Columbus. They sailed,
Obviously to England, Spain, Italy, Russia,
North Africa, the Middle East, Paris,
and I'm just showing here a map
of the ocean routes and the river
systems that they connected to and
sailed. What do you think drove them
to explore the unknown?
- This boggles my mind. This,
like this map here just,
it messes with me because
they didn't have a compass.
I mean, can you imagine shoving
off from some fjord in Norway
west. That's your only, west.
And there was a Viking named
Naddodd. He's actually the first
Norseman to reach Iceland, though it was a
total accident. But here's the, here's the
mind-blowing part. He
decides to land and explore,
and he gets off and he sees two
humans. They're monks from Ireland.
They got there in a canoe.
You look at Ireland, look at Iceland,
that's even more impressive.
They got in a canoe, a skin boat-
... and they just went north because they
were trying to get away from the world.
They found Iceland, and
in a very excellent move on their part, they
ran away as soon as the Vikings arrived, which
is, you know, pretty smart.
- I don't know if you know there's
this video of the deranged penguin
with the Werner Herzog documentary, where
Werner Herzog is like, overdubbing, explaining
the thinking of the penguin. But the
penguin leaves the tribe and he just goes out into
the mountains. I have to show you this video.
This is my favorite video of all time.
There's this low-key documentary
where they're talking about penguins, and
then there's one penguin that leaves-
- I'm out.
- ... leaves the tribe and just
goes towards the mountains, and
as Werner Herzog says,
"Towards certain death." It
always reminds me of this kind of Viking
spirit or the— ... or the monk spirit.
There's something, one human or a small
group of humans just decide to go.
- Just go, yeah.
- And not look back.
- Are there sea monsters out there? Maybe.
- Maybe.
- Is there any land? Are we gonna fall
off the edge of the earth? Maybe.
- And just as Werner Herzog says,
you know, "There's certain death."
Now, he doesn't romanticize it. He says
the penguin is just deranged and crazy.
But look, the penguin
did look back briefly.
- Right.
- He did think about this. So this—
... there's two ways, there's
multiple ways, but you just
highlighted two ways to explore.
One is 'cause you're this
hardcore dude that just is looking to
raid and just goes and goes and just
you have the resilience and the will-
... to keep going. And then there's
the monks that just want to leave.
- Escape, yeah. Yeah.
- They just go toward the,
they want to leave far away-
... so they could be closer to God. They
could be closer to themselves and to-
- And away from sin. Yeah.
You know, there's this poem by
Tennyson, Ulysses, my favorite poem.
Uh, I think it captures the Viking
spirit. The last line of it is to strive,
"to seek, to find, and not to yield."
I think that's very much like the
Viking, you know, "My purpose holds, to
sail beyond the baths of all the western
stars until I die." You may die, but I'm
gonna do this, and I'm not gonna yield.
- That spirit is one of my favorite
aspects of human beings.
- I think that's why the Vikings
remain so popular today, you know?
We name our satellites, our football
teams, you know, our cruise ships.
There's this like, there's this romantic
hook- ... of a people who did not yield.
- Yeah, they embodied the part, the
flame that burns in all of us
that we admire most about human beings.
Is that like unyielding focus on
going out there, of taking
a leap into the unknown,
into the scary, and never stopping.
- That's right. It's not too
late to seek a newer world.
- I have to ask you about, speaking
of a newer world, America.
And Leif Ericson. But first, a
quick bathroom break if it's okay.
Quick 30-second thank you to our sponsors.
Check them out in the description. It really
is the best way to support this podcast.
Go to lexfridman.com/sponsors. We got
Larridin, for measuring AI adoption
in your business, BetterHelp,
for mental health, LMNT,
for electrolytes, Fin, for
customer service AI agents, Shopify
for selling stuff online, and
Perplexity, for curiosity-driven
knowledge exploration.
Choose wisely, my friends. And now, back
to my conversation with Lars Brownworth.
All right, we're back. Let's talk
about this incredible fact of
the Vikings, that Leif Ericson,
who was a Viking explorer,
was the first European to reach
North America around the year
1000, five centuries before
Columbus reached North America.
Tell the story of his journey.
What do we know about him?
- So let's begin with his dad. His
dad's name is Erik the Red, who
was forced to flee Norway when
he was probably 10 years old
because his dad had killed some
people. It's kind of hilarious.
In the saga it says,
"For a few killings..."
Okay, I guess that's a
thing. So he went to Iceland
and he got a farm in Iceland which
was already starting to become
overpopulated. They had cut
down all the trees. There were
some climate problems of deforestation
and farms just blowing
away, so the population was
essentially beginning to
crash in Iceland. And he
got into a fight with his neighbor
and ended up killing his neighbor,
and so he was exiled from Iceland. He was exiled
from the place his father had been exiled
from.
- So it runs in the family,
this whole outlaw thing.
- What also ran in the family
apparently was this streak, this
courageous streak. And he had heard
that there had been people... So the,
the Norwegian Vikings, they
were aiming for England, and
they hit the Hebrides, which are
these kind of treeless islands
above Scotland, and they found they were
good for refueling 'cause they'd get,
pick up water or whatever, and then
on your way to Scotland to raid.
And then a Viking had missed
the Hebrides and discovered
Iceland, and then another
Viking had aimed for
Iceland, missed, and hit
Greenland. And a little fun
fact about Greenland, it is both
north, south, east, and west of
Iceland. So it's any direction,
you're gonna hit Greenland.
- So Greenland is hard to miss.
- It's hard to miss, which is not
to take away anything from the
extraordinary danger, the certain
death of going further west. But
there was this... By this time, there was
this idea that, you know, enough people
had become famous by sailing
west into the unknown and
discovering things, that I think there was a
general idea of there's more out there to the
west. And so he had talked to
someone who had seen Greenland and
reported that there was this
good land further west. And so
he hired the ship's crew of that Viking.
So it's kind of the deck was loaded,
and he went to Greenland where he was able
to settle two different colonies. One
was called the Western Settlement
in the west, and one was called the Eastern
Settlement in essentially the extreme south.
And that was essentially the edges
of where Viking technology could be.
A cool factoid is that the
Vikings practiced husbandry,
raised animals, and obviously
this is not an option
in Greenland, although they couldn't have known
it at the time. But they brought plants with
them. So, and then they were able to
trade with the native Inuit for walrus
blubber and things like that,
and they made a go of it. But
what's obvious, you know,
anyone who's seen Greenland,
there's, there are no trees. It's
almost impossible to survive
by practicing husbandry. It is
impossible to survive, as it turns out,
just practicing husbandry. And
by this point, I think this
extraordinary Viking pragmatism is
beginning to be played out. Because
one of the reasons the Greenland experiment
fails ultimately in 300 years is they
fail to adapt. It's clearly they
should, they should focus more on
fishing, on other sources than, than
just raising pigs and cows. But-
- Oh, so we hit the limit of the,
the Viking adaptability which they have
demonstrated throughout the world, I'd say.
Interesting.
- So Erik the Red is this, he
makes his name by exploring,
and he does in fact, once he discovers
Greenland, he calls it green.
He says there's so many salmon in the
rivers of, in the fjords that you can
just scoop them out with your
hands. You don't even have to fish.
- Was this real?
- It's a lie.
- Okay.
- That's not true at all.
- So he's doing propaganda.
- He's doing propaganda.
- So is that... Is this story true that he
called it green just so he can attract-
- It is.
- So-
- The greatest real estate
scam in history. Yeah.
- Okay. Genius. I mean,
just stuck to this day.
- Yeah. It's the most misnamed
place in the world.
But in the Europe of the
time, even in Iceland, the
dream was to have land. I mean,
land equaled wealth in Europe.
And here he says there's enough
land for the taking, like
anyone who wants it, which is true. It's
the largest island on earth. I mean, it's,
it's unusable, but it
should be called Iceland,
Glacier Land or something. But
it worked. He took 500 men
with him from Iceland. It's gotta
be a significant chunk of the
population, but there's enough people, kind
of land hungry, there's no more room in
Iceland. It's too restrictive. We're gonna
go further west. So he takes 25 ships and
then 14 make it, which is pretty good.
And then those 14 ships with their
300 or so people start the
western colony. And then word
gets back to Norway, but Norway's 2,000
miles away, 2,000-plus miles away. So it's,
you know, contact... They're having to get
resupplied. In the first winter, all their
cattle die. That's not a great,
that's not a great start for
people who practice husbandry. So they've
got to get resupplied from Norway,
but, you know, the chances of making
it to Norway and back are actually
not that great if you're
sailing without a compass.
You're just kind of hoping. But they
do it. They do it. And the colonies
survive until the 1400s,
where they just go silent.
- So let's talk about Erik the
Red's son, Leif Erikson.
How does the journey continue west?
- So Erik is getting a little older.
The Greenland settlements are
becoming filled up. Erik is happy where
he is. He's been kicked out of enough
places. He's made his home here, and
this is where he wants to be. But
his son... They're running out
of resources. There's no wood.
You know, there's limited food, et
cetera, et cetera. And so his son
proposes going west because he's
heard stories that there are
other lands. So another Viking had
gotten lost, aimed for Greenland and
missed, and had seen
something. He said he saw
clouds and mountains and there's
land there. And then he had
turned around. And Leif again did the
same thing, he hired the man's crew.
He asked his dad to come, his dad wouldn't.
He went with his half sister Freydis, who
was a whole nother story by
herself, and a bunch of other
colonists, and they went,
and they landed in a place.
He called it Vinland because he found-...
things that he could ferment. So, of
course, the Vikings, they made wine, or a
wine-like alcohol. So Leif Erikson is,
he's landed. He doesn't know this, but
he's landed on a new continent with
essentially inexhaustible stores of food and
timber and everything he
needs. It's the perfect place.
Unfortunately for him,
it's also inhabited by
some natives, probably the
Algonquin tribe. He calls them
the Skraelings, which is just
Norse for screechers because he
can't understand their language. They
just yell at them and attack immediately.
They stay there for three
years and then give up
and go back home. So ultimately, it... and
then really don't tell anyone about it.
They just keep it in their northern sagas.
- Why do you think they left? Why do you
think they didn't stick around longer?
- I think there are a number of things working against them.
Of course, I would like to believe there's an alternate
history where the Vikings
successfully make it down,
you know, maybe down to Maryland or
something, and there's an alternate history
of the US and Canada here, but I
think there's a number of things
working against them. The
first is they stubbornly
refused to give up husbandry, so
they're trying to make this work.
L'Anse aux Meadows I think is where they
were, in Newfoundland. It doesn't work.
The climate's too cold. It's not...
the grasses aren't appropriate, you
know, it's just not gonna work and
they do not adapt, number one. Number
two, they're 2,000-plus miles
away from Norway and getting
resupplied, and although they are
extremely good sailors and explorers
and traders, I think this
is a little too far.
And then thirdly is the native
resistance. It's just too
incessant. They are outnumbered,
you know, millions to one.
And the Algonquin do not
want them there. It's clear,
and they're not gonna stop attacking.
- It's so fascinating because
they really didn't understand
the full scale of the land
they've encountered, right?
- That's right. That's right. I mean,
had they known, had he known-
... what he had found-
- That there's more south.
Maybe they, their intuition-
- That's right.
- ... was like there's not... it's
just all northern land, it's void of
resources. We can't do the
whole husbandry thing.
But you would think they
could go down the coast.
- I mean, if they could have gotten
enough people from Norway,
you know, or Iceland or whatever,
you know, a sizable enough colony,
and build some kind of defenses to
fight off the incessant attacks-
... then I think that's the difference there,
'cause there certainly the resources are all there.
- Mm-hmm. Or just keep staying in the
water, keep going down the coast-
- Yeah. Yeah.
- ... not necessarily camp out until,
until you get further south.
It is fascinating to think about that
alternate history where they would have
discovered America and
settled there. So this is 500
years before Columbus. There's...
first of all, they could have
done a lot of the stuff we
think about the European nations doing,
including brutality towards the
natives. But there could have been
a coexistence also, and some
of the diseases that come with
them could have done the damage that
they did 500 years later. But now,
it would have stabilized the populations
to where the Europeans, the French, the
Spanish, and so on who come, the
natives would be more ready. So
they would... Europe would then encounter
a sizable population of the
Viking descendants and the
natives to where the two
could hold onto the land
and bring a different kind
of civilization there.
Because ultimately Europe, with
the European ways, of the Western
civilization, expanded
out into North America,
but there could be this whole Scandinavian
vibe- ... that would have taken over.
- Just a hair's breadth. My favorite
museum in New York is called The
Cloisters. It's part of the Met, and in
the Cloisters, there's an ivory cross.
And the ivory cross has been richly
carved with Christian scenes.
It was carved in England, but
it's made of walrus ivory,
and they got it from the New World.
And the Viking, you know, Viking traders.
It represents, you know, the great
arc of the northern trade. So it's
walrus ivory from the New World via
Norway to England to New York.
It's a great symbol of that trade.
- This whole just period of
thousands of years of exploration
that we no longer can do, so it's kind
of geographic exploration of the world,
is fascinating. It takes true
courage. It takes true wander.
Uh, the kind of exploration we could do now
is more in the scientific realm and the realm
of ideas and then maybe in terms
of geography out into space and
exploring the universe.
- Yeah, I think the closest analog is
probably Mars, right? I mean, what would
it take for you to be like, "All right, I'm
gonna leave and I'm gonna go to Mars"? You're,
never coming back. There's nothing
there as far as you know. You know, all
the accoutrements of civilization are
not there. It's- that's the kind of
courage you would have taken.
- Yeah, but there's, on top of that, with
Greenland, with Iceland, with Finland,
there's just so much uncertainty,
like literally what's beyond
this hill. So with Mars,
everything is mapped. So,
so it's really you, you understand
the full harshness of the situation.
- Of what you're gonna face, yeah.
- So it's more, it's that's more akin
to like, all right, I'm running an
ultra-marathon. I
understand the challenge.
I think more akin would be
like traveling out into
like the Oort Cloud, like
beyond the solar system.
- What's scarier, the known or the unknown?
- I think that deeply, the human
nature pulls us towards the unknown.
- No, it's true. Yeah.
- All right. Speaking of
which, going to the East.
So like we mentioned, the Vikings
really went all over. And one of
the directions they went that ended
up touching the Byzantine Empire in
Constantinople, is they went
East. What can you say about the
8th century journey East in the river
networks that the Vikings did, the Swedish
Vikings, the Varangians, as they began
to explore the river systems of Russia?
- So this was the most surprising
part for me when I was
first thinking about writing the book
and, you know, discovering where the
Vikings went. I never... In a million years,
it would've never occurred to me that the
Vikings went East. But a- a
good way to think of this is
the Vikings launched themselves in
whatever direction their country is
facing. So Sweden goes
to the East, Denmark
goes down toward Germany, and
Norway goes England and the New
World. So there's a Viking
named Rorik who goes East
and manages to set up an encampment
on this lake called Staraya Ladoga.
- Which is a launchpad to both the
Volga River and the Dnieper River.
- Yeah, and these are major river systems
in the East that take you all the way
down to the Black Sea and the
Caspian Sea. Because the Vikings,
you know, such sea-born people,
they can sail up rivers.
This allows them access
to the caliphates in the
East and to the Byzantium Empire, where
they, being Vikings, immediately
decide to attack the city.
The Byzantines essentially set the Sea of
Marmara outside of Constantinople on fire-
... and burn up all the Viking
ships. So then the Vikings decide,
"Okay, we can't, we can't take Constantinople,
so we might as well join 'em if
we can't beat 'em." And they end up as
probably the most famous guard in
Byzantine history, the Varangian Guard.
Varangian means the men of the oath.
Or the men who've sworn an
oath. This is kind of an analog
of the Praetorian Guard in Ancient Rome.
They were famously loyal
to the throne, but not
necessarily to the person
sitting on the throne.
they're major power
players. The last of the
great Byzantine emperors, Basil the Bulgar
Slayer, forms them in the late 900s.
And they're there with the history
all the way up until the end of it.
In fact, many of our famous
Vikings, Harald Hardrada
serve in the Varangian Guard. If you go to
Constantinople today, inside the Church of the
Hagia Sophia, on the second
floor there's a marble balcony,
and on the railings, you can find
Norse runes that are carved in by
Varangian Guards who were bored
during a particularly long sermon,
in a language they didn't understand,
but they had to stand there.
- So that's a fascinating thing,
which is the Varangian Guard
guarding the emperor of
the East Roman Empire,
is made up initially, for quite
a bit of time, of Vikings.
I mean, like speaking of pragmatic,
they just integrate into everything.
Now eventually, the Varangian Guard
became less and less Viking over time.
But this whole... You fast-forwarded
the story, we should mention
that Staraya Ladoga in 753 AD is when it
was established, opening the connection to
the two rivers, and they
began trading on the rivers
and establishing more stable
states along the rivers,
including the Kievan Rus in 862, 882,
where the Varangians, so
it's the Swedish Vikings,
they took Novgorod, they took Kiev,
and they established the Kievan Rus
there. And that is what led to the
connection to the Byzantine Empire,
where they started to... Again,
the Vikings went from being Vikings.
They go through this process of trading
and then establishing a state, now
they're doing treaties of different
kinds, and they're also waging,
or trying to wage war. And
going all the way to Constantinople,
and having a deep admiration for
Constantinople, enough to then begin
to dream of sacking Constantinople.
- Yeah. I mean, once they're alerted to
the wealth that's there, you know,
Vikings being Vikings, they show up.
- Can you speak to the Greek
Fire? So this was 941 and 944
when they tried, and then Greek Fire was
this technology developed by the Romans.
- We don't really know what it was,
Greek Fire. It was a form of
napalm, obviously. We have the
ingredients what made it up,
naphtha and oil and things like
that. But it was this very
flammable material that
would ignite on contact.
So the Byzantines would fill
it into clay pots and then
throw the clay pots. As soon as
it's exposed to oxygen, it would
start burning. They also had siphons. They
would carry, like, flamethrowers on their back
and they would just spray
it at enemies. And the real
devious thing about it is that if
you launch this clay pot at a ship
and the material, you know,
pooled across the wood and
then dripped off into the water, being oil,
it would float on top of the water and
continue to burn. So that
if you were a sailor and
you jumped off the ship 'cause
it's on fire and jumped into
this oil patch that's on fire,
you'd be coated with it and you'd
burn underneath the water. It was a horrible
way to go. So this was a state secret,
closely guarded secret. So closely
guarded—it remains a mystery to this day
of what exactly it was.
- Which is incredible, right?
- Yeah. But it, in the 944 attack on
Constantinople, I mean the Vikings are coming
on their ships. They brought these ships from
Sweden. I mean that's crazy.
They're in the Black Sea. They've
sailed and they kind of
swarm at the Byzantines. The
Byzantines launch a bunch of
decrepit old ships toward them
that have Greek fire on them,
and that turns the tide. But
the Byzantine emperor so
appreciates the strength of
these horrifying Vikings that
he forms a bodyguard of them.
- And hence we get just a few years
later, again, tried to sack
Constantinople and then join them.
- Join 'em, yep.
- The Varangian Guard in 988
with Basil II and Vladimir,
they make Varangian Guard into an
institution, and then the word of mouth
spreads that this is a
real career path for the,
for the Viking, is to join the guard.
- Yeah, that's right.
'Cause not only do you get paid
very, you're compensated very well
obviously for defending the emperor, particularly if
you do a good job, but you also have opportunities
'cause the emperor sends you,
"Let's go attack, you know,
this tribe," and you get to keep whatever
you take. So there's tremendous amounts of
war profiteering you can accomplish. And
the other great river system, the Volga,
that brings you to the the great
enemy of the Byzantines, the Abbasid
Caliphate. And they had a lot of trading
links with the north. So you get things
like fur and amber, lots of
slaves from the from the
Islamic world going up. You even
have in a Swedish coin hoard,
there's a Buddha that's been
found. I mean- ... it's Sweden.
- Yeah. So these networks of trade, just
how incredible are they with geography,
right? You can transform
your understanding of land
from the geography of the
land to the geography of the
river networks, because the way
they raid and then invade and
then conquer England is
through the rivers. It's an
incredibly different way
of seeing the world.
- Yeah. And if you look at the kingdoms the
Vikings created, I'm thinking particularly
of like Eric Bloodaxe
in, you know, in York,
he's controlling parts of Ireland parts of
Scotland, Wales, England.
Like there's no... That
doesn't make sense unless, unless
you're a Viking. You know, he's...
That also added tremendously
to the terror that the
Vikings brought, because I mean you
should probably be a little careful with
absolute statements here, but I
can't think of a major European city
that's not on a river.
Uh, which meant now with the Vikings,
'cause they could travel up, you
know, rivers, the shallow
rivers and then carry their
boats whenever, they would, everything
was on the table now, even hundreds
of miles inland is on the table.
- Mm-hmm. And an incredible speed, much faster
than the land armies. It's terrifying.
- It's terrifying.
- So you're living in a
constant state of fear.
- Constant state of fear.
- We've talked about this transition
in several different contexts, but
you've written about this. It's
really interesting. Is
the Vikings, like Ragnar,
going from this mode of sea kings with
no territory to the mode of land kings?
Do you have like somebody like Harald
Bluetooth, 10th century Viking king of Denmark,
you go from being these
grand explorers that are
free to being state builders. Was this
always inevitable for all of these
Vikings? Could we speak to the different
transitions, maybe in England?
- I think in one way, it's
inevitable. There's so many
examples of destroyers who
just wreck civilizations.
The builders are much more rare,
you know? So I think it's,
it's one of the reasons I think Augustus is
a much more interesting person than Julius
Caesar is. Augustus was
a builder, and I like to
see that. I like to see not just can
you pull down, but can you build up?
You know, just to take
Ireland for example,
Dublin, Limerick, almost every major city
in Ireland was founded by the Vikings.
So I don't think it's just a given that it
would have happened. I think there's something
about the Vikings, and it's probably
tied to their pragmatism, their, like
this pragmatic streak of, "We're gonna
use whatever. Oh, this system of
king works. This taxation system's
pretty good, let's keep it."
You know, "Oh, this is, this
doesn't work. Let's ditch it."
- Yeah, they, I mean the,
they went from destroyer to
builder very naturally and very quickly.
- Yeah. There's a natural process
from conquering to building,
but it does take talent and it
does take a certain something.
- Can we talk about so one of the
great Vikings, Canute the Great?
- I love Canute. I love Canute. I think he never,
he doesn't get his due. He's one of those
unsung heroes, I think, of the
Viking world. He had a reputation.
He was called the Emperor of the North.
He had this massive, you
know, England, Scotland,
Wales, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark.
I mean he's just tying it all together.
He was an extremely
effective English king.
I believe he introduced the
penny, sadly discontinued, but I—
- Oh wait, really? Discontinued?
- Discontinued. They're no longer making...
- The penny is discontinued.
- 2025's the last, the last penny.
- Oh, no.
- Everything's gonna go up by five.
- Uh, so going to Perplexity.
Canute the Great
was an early 11th century
Danish ruler who became king of
England, Denmark and Norway....
creating what historians call
the North Sea Empire. He's
often regarded as one of the most
effective kings in Anglo-Saxon
English history for stabilizing the
realm after decades of Viking warfare.
Again, an example of a destroyer
becoming a state builder.
- Yeah. He was, he was extremely
strong. He was effective.
You know, England went from
being the whipping boy of
the Vikings to controlling the Vikings.
- And ended up on a pilgrimage to Rome.
- Went to Rome. Yeah.
- So he although a Viking war leader,
Canute ruled as a Christian king—
... Patronizing churches and
monasteries and going on pilgrimage to
Rome in 1027 where he attended the
Holy Roman Emperor's coronation.
- Yes, he was recognized by his
contemporaries as something special, right?
You don't get invited to those
coronations if you're a nobody.
But the most famous story of Canute
that I know, my favorite story, is,
you know, being in positions of power,
being famous, a lot of people sucking up to
you, a lot of people telling you
whatever they think you wanna hear.
And so people are telling him all the
time how wonderful he is, and he takes
his whole court down to the
seashore and orders his,
his courtiers to carry him on
his throne into the water,
and then he commands the seas to stop,
the waves to stop and to retreat.
And they don't obviously, and everyone
thinks he's a little... But his point
is that, "Y'all are saying how great I am.
I have no control." I mean, this is his
active humility to kind of embarrass...
"I have no control over anything. Stop
telling me I'm the greatest
thing since sliced bread."
- I like the leaders, and there's
a few of them in history that
rise to the very top, and they're
still able to maintain humility.
Marcus Aurelius in the
Roman Empire is an example
that, you know, reading
Meditations is also just an
insight into the mind of a man who's
to himself, 'cause Meditations
is not supposed to be
work that's published. It's just a diary.
To himself, he's deeply humbled. And-
... and one of the most powerful humans
in history- ... is still humble.
- The two most famous stoics, one was
an emperor and one was a slave.
- So in the other part of the
world, you've written a
book and you did a legendary podcast
series on The Byzantine
Empire, the East Roman Empire,
AKA, The Roman Empire.
Well, let me actually
just as a tangent of a tangent ask you
about the podcast. So you're, you created
what is widely considered to be the first
history podcast. This is
before Dan Carlin, before
all the amazing podcasts we
all know and love. So the
podcast series of course is The Twelve
Byzantine Rulers: The History of the Byzantine
Empire. What motivated you
to explore this medium
of podcasting? What... In, in the
early, this must've been 2005,
something like this.
- It was, it was '05, yeah.
- And people should go listen to it because
it, it's still, I mean, it's like, it's
like we're talking about like
ancient times or something, 'cause it is
now a long time ago, but it's still an
incredibly good podcast.
It's a great podcast series.
- Thank you. At the time,
there's a series that I would
get at the library called The Great Courses.
I don't know if you're familiar with-
- Yes. Great Courses, yes.
- There was one particular professor.
His name is Bob Brier, and he
was, he's an Egyptologist, lives on
Long Island where I'm from, and he,
I mean, it's a massive
thing. It's like 24 hours-
... of lectures about the entire
history of Egypt, and it was
fascinating, 'cause he was,
he's such a good storyteller.
And I was reading...
As a kid I could never
figure out if I liked the medieval period
better or the Roman period better.
I was constantly going back and forth, and
I stumbled across a book which referred
to the medieval Roman Empire, and
it was a bit like discovering
your favorite TV show had 12
extra seasons you didn't know about.
And they were just as good.
So I... It really was
a labor of love. I couldn't, I would
not shut up about The Byzantine
Empire. So my older brother, we would go on
walks together and I would be like, "And
then Justinian, you know, da, da, da."
And he stopped me, he said, "I have no idea what
you're talking about. I have no idea, like, I need a
framework. Give me a framework for this."
So I went home and I recorded myself
giving a framework, which turned
out to be episode one, but
I think I said it, I did it in a British
accent, a really bad British accent.
I was just messing around.
And I gave him the... Luckily, I did
it in my regular voice as well as this
goofy accent, and I gave it to him and
then I forgot about it. And that summer
I was on a dig in Petra
excavating the Temple
of the Winged Lions, which was
like a dream come true for me. And
I get this email from my brother
and he said, "Oh, I just
submitted it as a podcast."
So he had to tell me what that
was. But I was going for,
to the extent that I had put thought
into it, I was going for kind of a
longer form lecture Great Courses
series on the Byzantines.
and then a bunch of people started emailing me
saying, "When's episode two coming out?" Oh, okay.
So I guess there has to be an episode two.
And then the thing kinda snowballed from
there. I had no idea what I was doing.
- Uh, your brother, by the
way, is super tech savvy.
- He is. It wouldn't have happened
without Anders. So Anders, thank you.
- But like looking back now, what
do you think about that medium?
Why do you think it connected so much,
To people? Because you've
also written several
amazing books. One of
them is on The Byzantine
Empire. Just looking back
in a retrospective kind of
way, because that from there
blew up an entire industry of
incredible other history podcasts
and podcasts in general.
- Yeah, I've been... That's a great
question. I've been trying to think
for the past 20 years,
like why it's such a,
such a niche field, right? Why would people
be interested in it? Um, I think number
one, it's a great story.
And people are people,
and we haven't changed much, which is
one of the reasons why it's accessible,
because it's very... These are
people you could meet today.
Um, but I think podcasting in general,
because there's such a low bar to get in, or
there was at the time. I mean, there's
nobody else, so just by virtue of being
first, you know, it attracted
attention. Whatever its merits,
being first was the strongest one.
- Which is say you also did
another series on the Normans
who no longer had the benefit of being first
and were still nevertheless very good,
so...
- Oh, I appreciate that.
Thank you. It was...
But I think podcasting in a
way democratizes learning.
Um, you know, it unlocked the potential
of all these armchair historians.
I'm one of them who's like, "Hey this is
really cool. I'm passionate about this."
You know, anything that allows
you to tap into your passion,
you know, I think is gonna
be, is gonna be great.
- And the Byzantine Empire's an
interesting one. I don't understand
maybe... And, and you articulated
this well, but it doesn't get
like the love that it maybe deserves in
history. I think the, the framing
of the book you wrote on the
topic is the reason we have
Western civilization as we know,
or European-based Western
civilization. In a sense because you
have... They... Let's see,
maybe you can articulate
the different ways they connected the
thread, but one of them is they preserved
the knowledge when the West
was when- when Europe was
going through a dark period, they
protected Europe in all those ways.
- And then eventually they jumpstart
the Renaissance, 'cause people are...
Constantinople's gonna fall. It's
inevitable. It's surrounded by hostile
powers, and so they start
migrating to Italy.
Um, just at the moment Italy is receptive
to its Greco-Roman past.
Uh, Greek had died
out in the West actually as early as the
time of Justinian in the 500s, 560s.
They needed... If you wanted to travel between
the eastern and western parts of the empire, you
needed, you know, guidebooks with
helpful Latin or Greek phrases.
So Latin had died out in the East
and Greek had died out in the West
by the 14th century, so you needed
Byzantine teachers to be able to
read Plato and Aristotle.
- The book also emphasizes as
we've mentioned, a kind of
great man view of history. So
celebrating people like Constantine and
Justinian. Or Justinian, who would
be your number one top emperor
in the history of the East
Roman Empire, Byzantine Empire?
- Hmm, that's a good question. I
mean, romantically, it's gotta be
Justinian. He dreams big. He dreams
big. He doesn't always get there,
but he dreams big.
- He dreamed and tried to reconquer
the Western Roman Empire. I mean,
he was a- a lot of wars of
conquest- ... and built the...
- Built the Hagia Sophia. I mean, I
think this is... You know, we- we're
interested in the Egyptians
because they built the pyramids. We're not interested
in the pyramids because they were built by the
Egyptians, right? It's like what is
the great thing that your society has
created? I think the Hagia Sophia is that
for the Byzantine Empire. I mean, to
go in it today is still the closest
you can come to the fifth century.
You know, and it peeled back the imperial
splendor of what it must've been
like. You know, you can still see it.
You can smell it. You can feel it.
Like, it's there.
- There's actually a really nice
video on YouTube of you going from
I think 50 to 60 years ago. I don't know.
- Seems like that. It does seem like that,
yeah. We actually were kicked out.
- Oh, what'd you do?
- My brother and I went.
- What would you do?
- Well, you know, they- as you
know, they're very strict as to
guides. They want to promote the local
economy, so you have to have a local
guide. You can't go in there and look like
you're being a tour guide if- without a
license. You have 15 different
organizations. So we
went there early, the- the hour
it opened, and we had the entire
cathedral to ourselves.
And so we went around and
my brother's holding this camera and I'm,
you know, goofily pointing things out.
And one of the guards noticed us, and,
you know, we had to remove
ourselves from the building.
- And so one of the things, I mean Justinian
was a critical person in this too.
He overhauled the Roman law. The
legal system, the law... First of
all, the Roman Empire in general,
the East Roman Empire propagated it.
They believed in the law.
They held onto the law.
- That's right.
- And that's many of the legal
ideas we take for granted
is grounded in everything developed in the
Roman Empire and stabilizing the Roman
Empire, so they carried that flag forward.
- Yeah. I mean, outside of Great Britain,
all European legal systems are
based on, ultimately based
on the Code of Justinian,
and then weirdly, because of the French
connections, the State of Louisiana.
Actually, if you want to be a lawyer,
you have to pass a different bar in
Louisiana than in
everywhere else in the US.
- Why do you think the Western
Roman Empire and then the
Eastern Roman Empire collapsed?
Just looking at the grand picture of
the history of the Roman Empire, it's
2,200 years starting from the
kingdom to the republic.... and
to the imperial period, to
the East Roman Empire period.
Why do societies rise and fall?
- That's a really interesting question, and there are
probably as many answers as there are different
kingdoms. But just the Roman Empire. My
take on it is that the collapse really
starts at the end of the reign of Basil
II. So the year is 1025. Basil is the last
monarch of the Macedonian dynasty, which
had seen the empire
become the most powerful
state in the Mediterranean, much more
powerful and advanced than its Muslim
or Christian neighbors. He had expanded
the empire essentially as large as it was
going to be after Justinian.
It was wealthy, it was
glittering, it was educated. I mean, courtiers
had to memorize the works of Plato by
heart. The emperor, one of his
favorite activities was to go, and
he would begin a quote, and you would have to finish
it, but you didn't know where he would begin or
what he was thinking that day.
This is kind of what amused
him, so they're incredibly
literate. I mean, inside Constantinople
itself, the literacy rate was
close to 100, which is...
... crazy. But when he died,
the court, which had been this
magnificent court, this bureaucracy which
had been running the empire, and which is
vital to the workings of the empire,
they convinced themselves that they could run
the empire, they didn't actually need the
emperor. And so they specifically
selected weak rulers,
and then that led directly to the
disastrous Battle of Manzikert
in 1071, where the Turks enter the story
and defeat, destroy the
Roman army under Romanos
Diogenes, who's attempting to break
free of the bureaucratic constraints.
And then Anatolia gets flooded by these
nomadic warriors, and the Byzantine
gets pushed out on the... So once
they've lost the heartland, they've
lost their source of troops, they've
lost their source of taxation,
they've lost their source of
food. At this point it's
impossible to recover, and the
crusades are an attempt, the First
Crusade anyway is an attempt
by the Eastern Emperor Alexius
to recover Asia Minor, more
than Jerusalem. He wants to
recover Asia Minor, and obviously
it doesn't work out. So
I think at that point, it's on a
trajectory that can only end in collapse.
And I think that's, you can
see that same kind of thing
in the Viking world that we talked about,
this stultifying, bureaucratic, this
inflexibility.
- Combined with the growing
threats from all directions.
- Growing threats in all directions. Maybe
your own success is beginning to be a
problem. And you can't adapt as quickly,
you're not as lean and mean anymore.
There's too many traditions, too many, too
much, the weight of history breaks you.
- You sort of mentioned the Macedonian
period, the dynasty where it's
where the East Roman Empire flourished
once again, but like, they have
gone through so many periods
like that, and they lasted.
- That's true. That is true.
- I don't know what the reason
is, but you can really
trace the Roman spirit, the Roman state,
the core of whatever that is,
through that 2200-year period.
There's a real connection there, a
thread that connects all of it, and
so that, there's lessons.
That's why we do need to
study the Byzantine Empire for
lessons of what makes societies last.
Eventually everything collapses,
but like that one lasted-
- That one lasted a long time.
- ... longer. It's easier to last when you're hidden away
somewhere, but they were in the middle of everything.
Everybody wanted what they had.
- Yeah, they were getting hit on all sides.
There was, in their entire 2200-year
history, there was not a single year they
were at peace on all frontiers.
- And it wasn't always because
they were looking for trouble.
- No.
- They're, a lot of it is defensive.
- Yep, including with those pesky Normans.
- Yeah, yeah. On the topic
of great men in history,
so where do you land on this great debate?
How important are individual humans
versus systems? So what do you think
turns the tides of history? Can
individual rulers or individual
warriors or individual humans have the
power to change the course of history?
- Yeah, that's the question, isn't it? I...
The short answer is I subscribe to the
great man or great woman theory. Um,
I think there's moments I can't imagine the Protestant
Reformation. I don't think you can just swap out
Martin Luther and have a Protestant
Reformation. I don't think you can swap
out Augustus and have the Roman Empire.
I mean, there are... I don't think you
can swap out con- and so on and so forth.
I think ultimately these impersonal forces
are insufficient for explaining,
because we are people.
We are humans. We are, you know,
everything is kind of a relational thing.
And but at the same time,
you know, the moment needs the man, but
the man also needs the moment, you know?
- Some of it is timing, some
of it is the environment—
- Yeah
- ... the system around it. But yeah, I've
just seen so many incredible humans
that persevere through
things that would break
basically everybody. And
they, the power of the
belief they have. We were
talking offline about Napoleon.
Here's a guy who was a student of all
the great military generals of the past.
Extremely competent in being able
to micromanage every aspect of
military affairs of a nation,
but also extremely confident
in his vision of the world and ability
to conquer anyone. And you have
the same thing with Genghis Khan.
This boy that came from nothing.
Everything was taken away. He
united all of Mongolia, and then conquered
most of the known world to them,
including eventually China. And it's
like, well, can you possibly have
the great Mongol Empire
without Genghis Khan?
- No.
- And the same, and we as Americans ask
ourselves that question about the
founders. I mean, George
Washington, not to
romanticize it, but to give
away power symbolically
is a really powerful statement
like we'll mention with Augustus.
There's... When somebody's
given power, and in some sense
absolute power, what they do with
that power can reverberate through
generations, and that's in
the hands of an individual.
- Yeah. Yeah, that's exactly
right. That's well put.
You know, Cincinnatus in
Ancient Rome, same thing.
- What lessons from... This is a
big, ridiculous question, but-
... what lessons from all the
things we've talked about, the
exploration of the Vikings? What
lessons do you learn from Vikings?
- Lessons, lessons to learn
from the Viking Age.
- By the way, I should mention one
thing. It's a very practical lesson,
That we didn't talk
about that you taught me
is the, the Vikings were,
like groomed themselves.
- Oh yeah, yeah.
- They were like clean. This
is so very surprising to me.
That they like washed themselves and
then both the men and the women-
... really took care of themselves.
You don't often think about that.
- There was this whole... Like,
the Vikings, everyone at this...
Everyone has this very clear picture
of what a Viking looked like-
... and also has no idea what a Viking
looked like somehow at the same
time. Like, almost everything about
them is wrong- ... that we think of.
You know, almost everything about them is
wrong. They didn't wear horned helmets.
Um, they, their hair probably was
blonde disproportionately, but that
was more because they used lye to
dye it because it would kill the
lice. And then they would take baths on a
more regular basis than... I mean,
this depended on where you were. So
in England, for example, they were mocked
as being soft, which always blows my
mind. Like, really? You're gonna
mock the Vikings for being soft?
Because they took too many baths.
But then in the Muslim east
one Muslim traveler writes
that they were God's filthiest
creatures because of their habits of
kind of disgusting shared bathing.
- Oh, that aspect of it.
Yeah. So, it's not that they didn't
bathe, they bathed a little too much and
together.
- They bathed, but they also
like would brush their teeth-
... using like recycled water. Like, they would
then spit into a cup and pass it to the next guy.
- Got it.
- It was... It's not awesome.
- I read that... This is, this
could be propaganda, but I read
that in England there was worry that the
Vikings were a bit too attractive to the
women of England because, because of how
much the Vikings took care of themselves
in terms of grooming.
- Yeah. In the Danelaw, like you
get invaded by these people-
... they're kicking your
rear end militarily.
Now they're stealing your women just
to insult you as well. You know?
- Yeah. They're... They
wash themselves daily.
They've got good teeth.
What is this bullshit?
- Whether they need it or not,
I know. It really is...
- Why you guys can't have everything?
What are you doing? Anyway, I, so yeah,
so one of the lessons I think we need
to draw is shower daily.
- Shower daily.
- Yeah, there you go.
- That's right.
- That's the one thing I forgot.
- That's the lesson, that's the takeaway,
that's the big profound takeaway.
- Is there something bigger about the
exploration, about the leaps into the unknown?
- Yeah, I think a couple of years ago, there
were all these debates about statues.
Make sure we pull these statues down. This person
did a bad thing, let's pull these statues.
You know, and, and I always thought they were kind of
silly, too. I mean, I understand the point, but...
Like, we don't... When you have a statue of
Christopher Columbus, for example, you're not
glorifying every single thing the
man ever did and, and all the
bad stuff that comes from
this or that. You're
honoring something about him,
like the spirit it takes to
cross an ocean not knowing what's
on the other side, and, and that's
that spirit of exploration. I think
with the Vikings, it's the same.
There's this way you, you approach
the world, this fearless, pragmatic
approach. I think as an American
too, it's the ultimate,
it's the ultimate rags to riches. It's the myth we
tell ourself. You know, the, the man who starts
with nothing and ends up as a sea
king, well respected and sung
about by poets. I mean, that's, that's
it right there. You know, this is...
And when you're, when you're a
society and you stop doing this,
you run into trouble as well.
- Uh, what about the, the Byzantine
Empire? What lessons you draw from them?
- This is a much... That's
a much bigger one. Um-
- 1000-year history.
- 1000-year history, and it's also
what I think is so cool about the
Byzantines is that in the ways that they are
like us and the way that they are unlike
us. In some ways, they're
very analogous to the United
States. The kind of the polyglot nature
of their inhabitants, you know, the,
their roots, the Greco-Roman,
Judeo-Christian roots. And yet
it was a place of incredible alien
things as well. Men sitting on top
of pillars. You know, a king, an
incredibly hierarchical system
which abhorred democracy.
Um, so I think it's a way, it's a
route we could have taken... um,
and it's the way they handled
things. Immigration, inflation,
war, peace, diplomacy. I think
there are lessons there for us.
- Yeah. Yeah, I think from the Vikings,
the lessons are a bit more poetic.
The lessons from the Byzantine Empire
are quite literal, like how to run a
government, how to run the law, how to-
- Yeah. How to build a stable society.
And honestly, like you can count
on the fingers of one hand,
states that have lasted a thousand years,
right? Byzantium and Venice, I think.
And Venice was an offshoot of
the Byzantines. Like that's
a gov- for a government to last a thousand years
is a rare thing. Like, we should be taking a
look at this. Like how? And how
much of that is due to Augustus?
Can we give him any credit for
this? He built the system.
- Yeah. But there was a lot, like you
mentioned a lot of people along
the way from Constantine to Justinian, the
Basils. There's so many
emperors along the way
that revolutionized and then
restabilized the empire after it
was almost falling apart.
- Oh, yeah. You know what else too
though? Like what happens to a human
when you give that human
essentially absolute power? 'Cause the
Byzantine emperor stood halfway there.
I mean, he was more autocratic than
anything other than, I don't know, the pope
that we, you know, have
in the modern world.
What happens when you give someone that
level of power? Like, I love Justinian, but
I wouldn't have liked to know him.
You know, I wouldn't like
to be one of his subjects.
I love Basil I, but the man was
a bloodthirsty tyrant. Like,
I think it shows you what happened. What is
it? Lord Acton, "Absolute power corrupts, and
absolute power corrupts absolutely." Like
that's quite clear throughout Byzantine
histories, and it's a long, long list.
- And as technologies become more powerful,
absolute power becomes
potentially more destructive, so-
- Yeah, it's more absolute.
- It's more absolute.
- You know?
- And it's, I mean, this is the
project for the 21st century,
the 20th and the 21st centuries
post-Industrial Revolution, post the computer
technological revolution, post
nuclear weapons discovery.
How do we construct societies
that last like the Byzantine
Empire did a thousand years? It's
just like a new challenge for us.
There's gonna be history
books written about us
'cause like nuclear weapons,
you know, 80 years ago,
it's like Greek fire that you can apply
to the entirety of human civilization.
And so— ... there's gonna be good history
books, and I hope there's gonna be these
stories about the American
empire, about the rest
that sound similar to Byzantine Empire,
um, versus the Viking age. It only lasted-
... three centuries.
- I mean, I suppose the good news is it
can be done, right? Or it has been done.
- It has been done. What gives you
hope about the future, having
looked at the deep history
of us? What gives you hope?
- During grad school, I was reading
Frederick Douglass' autobiography,
and he said, "I could sit with Plato
and Cicero, and they would not flinch."
You know, by which he meant that the great
conversation was for everyone, no matter what your
skin color, no matter what your level of income,
and even no matter your intelligence, you know?
And I think that's
actually what, that's why
history comes alive for me, is
because these are not alien people.
You had asked how similar are ancient
people to us psychologically.
You know, and what their goals were
for life. And I think the short answer
is they were identical to us, which
is why we can understand them. It's,
why you should read things. It's
why you should read the Meditations
because this is not just some
dry whatever talking to himself
in a culture that you cannot
understand and can never recreate. It's
a human talking about being human,
you know? And I think human nature has not
changed, and I don't think human nature will
change. So we are flawed and broken, and
we're—that's the human condition.
We're gonna be flawed and broken.
So I don't think... I actually
think that's the great,
that's the great question of
history. If you wanna understand
history, you have to know
about human nature. What is
our human nature? If you think it's a blank
slate, and we can kind of educate ourselves to a
utopia or, you know, like the
Marxists said then, okay.
Hasn't really worked out, but okay.
If you believe we're basically bad,
there's a whole set of things that come with that. If you
believe we're basically good, there's a whole set of... Right?
So, you won't learn the appropriate
lesson if you misdiagnose human nature.
- Yeah. I think the diagnosis
that you're kinda hinting at is
seemingly the most accurate
one, which is we're flawed.
A mix of good, a mix of
evil, capacity for both.
- That's right. That's right. I mean,
I have to teach my kids to be
kind. I don't have to teach my kids to be
unkind. I mean, one of those is natural, and
one is not. I think my kids
can become kind, you know?
- The capacity.
- Is there.
- Humans have the capacity
for much great things.
But not perfection. It has
to come outside of us.
- Well, what is it? That line of
all of us are in the gutter, but some
of us are looking up at the stars.
And so you gotta teach as many of us and
to look up at the stars and
dream. Because once you
allow yourself to dream of
a better world, you try,
you try. Like the Vikings did,
go out there. Don't try to
not to murder your neighbor, but if
you do, all of us have, of course.
- If you do, there's Greenland.
There's Greenland.
- There's Greenland. Thank you for everything you've
done for the world. Thank you for the podcast you
put out there. Thank you for your incredible
books, and thank you for the conversation
today.
- Thank you. I really appreciate
the opportunity. Thanks a lot.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation with
Lars Brownworth. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the
description where you can also find links to
contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so on.
And now, let me leave you with
some words from the Volsunga Saga,
a 13th century Icelandic prose
epic that tells the story
of the Volsunga clan, a legendary Norse
dynasty of heroes and dragon slayers.
"Fear not death, for the
hour of your doom is set,
and none may escape it." And another
powerful quote from this saga is,
"Better to fight and fall
than to live without hope."
Thank you for listening, and
hope to see you next time.